Oh, here we go. Right.
Well done, folks.
That will record. Okay, let's get them in.
Just start.
Okay. We're underway.
Good afternoon, Gordon.
Hi, good afternoon. How are you?
Good. We can hear you, but can't see you.
Yes, I'm trying to figure that out, unfortunately.
If I figure it out, I'll get my camera on.
Okay.
It's in there.
There you go.
There we go.
Cool. Lovely to see you there. So look, we've got your submission, which you can
take as read. Anything you want to highlight in it, go for your life.
I will give you a call with about four minutes to go, because we do like to ask
questions, but
we're in your hands.
No, thank you. First off, I'd just like to thank the select committee for
allowing me to speak today, and also thank Cameron Brewer
for bringing the bill forward in the first place, which I think is a long time
overdue.
So my name is Gordon Mackay. I am the deputy harbourmaster for Canterbury
Region, and I'm also a member of the National Safer Boating
Forum leadership group.
So as ECAN, we support the amended bill to include all persons in
a vessel under six meters,
and this bill will create national consistency and at the end of the day, it will
save lives.
Canterbury already has a bylaw in place for vessels under six meters
and has had for the last, I would say, nearly 10 years,
and it is showing good progress. But we still have,
because of the lack of national consistency, we still have issues in the
region. So my day-to-day job
includes frontline compliance and interacting directly
with the boating public on the water and on the boat ramps.
So I would probably just like to just give you a couple
of real-world stories, and this is just from the last year,
which is really pertinent to what we're discussing today.
So probably late last year,
I got a call from the local police saying that they
had
a possible boat capsized. And this is quite close into
shore. We're talking less than 100 meters.
It turned out it was an elderly couple
who were fishing in a very well-equipped boat, five meters.
A rogue wave, and we're talking this was a flat calm day.
A rogue wave just came, capsized them, and tipped them out of the boat.
Because of our bylaw in place with the life jackets under six meters, they were
wearing them and they were wearing them correctly,
and they were able to get to rocks.
They got a bit banged up on the way, until we got there about 10 minutes later
to rescue them,
and we got them back with a few bumps and scrapes.
And I think that's a really good news story, the fact that the life jacket
bylaw itself actually works in the under six meters.
They would definitely not have been capable of keeping themselves afloat
in that conditions,
with the crashing waves, if it wasn't for the life jackets on.
And
another probably a lot more personal, this one
involved myself,
and this happened early last year.
I was out on a regular
work job on a five-and-a-half meter runabout
which was well-equipped, well-maintained.
We're all highly trained crew,
and we'd been out at the Lyttelton Heads and we were heading offshore
after that.
Just completely by chance, I took a call from our
base to head back into the inner harbor,
which we came in to go and check out a possible oil spill.
So as we got back in, and about 200 meters offshore, I
turned around and saw that
yay much water in the back of the boat, and it was coming in very quickly.
So at that point, I had to straight away doing damage
control, trying to figure out how to stop that water coming in and
everything. The last thing on my mind was putting a life jacket on
because I already had it on. I didn't have to think about it.
Mm-hmm.
It was already there.
And in that situation, you are trying to think about,
without panicking or trying not to panic,
you're trying to keep the boat afloat or trying to keep the boat safe and
keep your crew safe. I was able to get the boat
up onto the shore within about two minutes.
I reckon if it was another minute, we would've lost the boat, and we'd have
been swimming.
But to make it a little bit scarier is
before we were called in,
completely by chance, to go and check out an oil spill,
we were heading offshore from Lyttelton Heads.
If we had not had that call, we could have been two, three nautical
miles offshore, and we'd have been swimming, waiting for a helicopter to come pick
us up.
Mm.
And the fact that I had that life jacket on, if I had to spend that time putting
that life jacket on, I did not have time to look at
calling for help,
trying to keep the boat afloat. So, that's just a couple of real-world examples
for you.
Yeah.
That keeping-- and things happen very quickly on boats under six meters.
Not specifically boats under six meters, but small boats.
Yeah. No, thank you. The stories are very valuable to have.
So
are you ready for questions?
Yeah, well, just a couple of other quick things.
We're at four minutes now, so.
Okay. Four minutes, yeah. So I would recommend that
theThe waterline length is kept at
overall length.
Just practically for us in the field, it makes it a lot easier.
So as we are approaching people that are not wearing lifejackets, we are trying to
assess the length of the vessel.
We cannot do that with waterline length, but we can do it with-
We understand that, yeah.
Yeah.
No, that's ... Yeah.
Yeah. And just a thing, it's not a deal breaker, but I'd recommend that we
keep the wording as PFD and not change it to lifejacket.
It's just that there is an international
definition of a lifejacket,
and PFD works,
but everybody knows it as a lifejacket colloquially anyway.
Maybe it could be used as a explanatory note or something of the like.
I'm not sure how that would work.
Cool. I've got two questions, I think.
I'll take the first one from the now sponsor of the bill.
Mm.
Shane.
Yes. Thank you. Thank you, Gordon. Just a few brief questions.
Just to go over the byelaw that you've had in place for a decade.
Mm-hmm.
So it's based on length,
agnostic to age, and is it to wear or have available?
What is the nature of the byelaw that you have?
The byelaw is all persons must wear
a suitably fitted lifejacket on vessels under six
meters while underway.
Okay. Good. Thank you.
Okay, Celia.
Yeah. Thank you, and thank you for your
illuminating examples.
My question is, we have a submission from Fish and
Game, and I think they're not the only ones, who are
trying to define what we mean by while underway.
Now, your rogue wave out of nowhere was while they were sitting,
not moving very far and so on. So I don't know if you've
read the Fish and Game key points, but they say they would like
to exclude adults engaging in
activities when they're anchored using
GPS-assisted
anchoring systems, drifting slowly or motoring very slowly.
Do you think it would be unwise to exclude those activities?
Yes. At the moment, you're not
underway if you're at anchor,
but if you're using electronic trawling equipment or
GPS to keep you stable, then yes, you are
underway. And the fact that my previous
example there with that couple where they were-
Mm
... slowly drifting, fishing in an area, and in very
benign conditions, and then caught unawares.
I would
recommend against that.
Thank you.
So just to be clear, slowly drifting for you is underway.
Correct, yes.
Okay, so you've actually got to be anchored not to be.
Yes. You've got to be fixed alongside or anchored.
Okay, cool. Can I just ask one question, we've a minute left.
You recommend using PFD rather than lifejacket, but then you said your
byelaw
that you must wear a suitably fitted lifejacket.
Sorry.
Just so it's clear, because we also got this thing of there are a lot of vessels
which are under six meters, which are things like,
what do you call them, windsurfers and so on, where a
lifejacket might not be the appropriate device, but a PFD might.
Correct.
So, yes.
Sorry, yes. So I think I got the wording wrong there.
Okay.
The byelaw states PFD.
Okay. So, and have you got clarity around what is the appropriate
PFD for the appropriate situation in terms of the vessel that you're on and the
activity you're engaged in? Do you define that?
No, we don't define what is appropriate for
the sport. But that usually comes down to the
sport itself. So, like a high-speed sport
such as foiling or whatever, you don't wear a collar.
Yeah.
So if you hit the water, the collar's not going to come up and hit the back of your
head.
Yeah.
That sort of thing, too. But, yeah, we don't define that
as
specifically as you must wear this type of PFD.
Okay. So just that you've got to wear a PFD.
Yeah.
And you choose the one. Okay, cool.
Look, really appreciate it and thank you also for the stories and for the work that
you do.
Thank you.
Right.
We are Coastguard,
again by video.
Carl and just to make sure, we've got everybody else lined up?
Yeah.
Good, right. Okay.
Greetings gentlemen. Welcome again. Good to see you.
You know the general gist of things.
We're under time pressure, so that's why I'll leap straight in.
We've got you down for the normal 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call with four to go. We do like to ask questions.
Treat your submission as read, but anything you want to highlight, go for it, and
your time starts now.
Afternoon, all, and thank you again for allowing us the opportunity to
represent Coastguard New Zealand and our-
... our many volunteers and units spread across the country that are
doing amazing work on a daily basis, assisting
people who get into trouble out on the water.
First of all,
really appreciate the fact that the scope of the bill has been
extended to not just include under
15. I think that's a fantastic step forward.
We still do remain concerned, however, at having it
to under six meters.
As per our submission, you can see that for Coastguard New
Zealand, every life matters.
And so by
maintaining a minimum length, we're actually
not taking into effect the number of people that
have issues above and beyond the six-meter
length. And we've got a number of
examples of that. Alongside me
is National President Bennett, who is also a skipper on a Coastguard vessel,
who can talk to the number of incidents that we have out on the
water
that support our view that it should be
everybody wearing a lifejacket or PFD underway,
regardless of the length of vessel.
Yes, I think anyone involved in
the response,
whether volunteer or, in fact, whether Harbourmaster or Maritime
Police, or indeed member of the public,
would acknowledge that they
often find themselves
trying to support people who have actually come off a much larger vessel.
And while statistics
indicate the proportion of folk that are perhaps involved in smaller vessels, and
therefore the proportion of incidents that occur that happen to be off smaller
vessels,
those of us that are responding, of course, are aware of the circumstances behind
the stats and the humanity of it all.
And again, find time and time again that the people in the water have, one way or
another, fallen off of or been tipped out
of
a much larger vessel.
And we just
asked ourselves what kind of things have we seen in recent times
for people who have been on a 12-meter vessel or
40-foot launch who got pulled through the rail fishing and got
pulled through by a marlin. No one would've
expected that. That
person didn't have a life jacket on and was 30 nautical miles
off of Coromandel.
Miraculously survived for 24 hours in the water.
Wow.
Incredible.
So,
the point is
the risk-
No lifejacket
... is agnostic about age, as we've
acknowledged and
you have. The risk is also agnostic about size of
vessel, frankly. And we would
support the view that
anyone
on a recreational vessel
that is underway
of any size should be wearing
a PFD or a life jacket.
And we have plenty of evidence to demonstrate
that that makes sense. We have another story, a delightful story, about a
catamaran that hit a reef.
The individual fell into the water, and fortunately was rescued,
but lost sight of their dog, Rimu the dog,
who was gone.
Four days later,
some
spear fishermen spotted a dog in the bushes in one of the nearby
bays
and discovered that it was Rimu still wearing its life jacket.
Aw.
How good.
Okay.
And you have to wonder sometimes why people would make the effort of equipping
their dog with a life jacket, but not see fit to equip each other.
Mm.
So, really we could belabor this forever,
but the point I think is well made.
Anyone can find themselves in the water at any time,
and some of these circumstances are quite a surprise.
And when you find yourself in the water unexpectedly, you definitely want to
be wearing a PFD or a life jacket.
It's really that simple.
And when we start to draw the line on should it be six meters or less, or
eight meters or 10 meters, those are completely arbitrary lines and they
confuse the issue.
The fact is, if you're underway on a vessel, you should be wearing a life jacket,
period.
400%.
Just like if you're in a car, you should wear a seatbelt.
If you're on a bike, you should wear a helmet.
We don't put the seatbelt on and off depending on whether the skipper believes it's
safe or whether the driver believes it's safe.
We make an absolute statement so that everyone is quite clear what the risk
management looks like, and anyone that's involved in enforcement has a very
simple case to make about why that person should
be wearing a life jacket.
I'm looking forward to my next ferry trip.
Yeah.
I'm sure you don't mean that. Celia.
Well, that was really the question that I was going to ask was,
do you think it should be recreational only or
wider? And how do you define recreational?
If somebody's going on a lovely holiday trip with Pure Salt or
something and there's only about, I don't know, 20 passengers or something,
that's one, it's obviously longer than six meters, but it's
also not the Kaitaki. I had the joy of being on the Kaitaki wearing a
life jacket,
but fortunately we didn't need to use it.
Yeah. So the current maritime rules define what
a recreational or what a pleasure craft is and that's
clearly for personal use and not for hire and reward.
Whereas all the commercial vessels
are subject to additional safeguards and safety
measures
that in some ways compensate partially for not wearing a life jacket in their
circumstances where that's appropriate.
And you will be aware of instances where charter vessels
have come to grief-
Mm-hmm
... and people have perished because they haven't been wearing a life jacket.
But our submissions are focusing on
the recreational user and recreational craft, and the
difference is well defined in the existing maritime rules.
Thank you. Very interesting.
Okay, thank you. Carlos.
Yes. Hi. Good to see you, Carl.
I just want to mention last time, we talking about the length-based rule,
which
is this legislation based on will create unnecessary
complexity with the current Maritime Rules Part
91. Can you describe what
confusion will that cause,
or give us a little bit more detail on that?
Yeah. Currently within the maritime rules, there is no
definition of
length of vessel.
So therefore, by creating a length-based rule, we
actually now
would mean changing the maritime rules to include some sort of
arbitrary length within that. At the moment, it's not
defined.Within those rules, so that creates
additional confusion.
So does that mean that if we need to set up this legislation, we also need to
look into the Maritime Rules Part 91 as well to make a change on that, is it?
Correct.
Thank you.
Okay. Oh, Shane.
Thank you. I'm sure it'll be through the notes and it may well have been canvassed,
but can you just briefly precis, what is the international precedence for
recreational length? What do Australians do?
What do the Canadians, what do the US do? If you know.
I'm not familiar.
Yeah.
Sorry, Shane.
That's not a problem. Just to be-
I'm not aware of how other nations, in terms of the maritime rules, have
defined half-associated length.
I do know that in Europe, for example, I think it's 82 feet.
At 82 feet as a recreational user, you then need to adopt a lot of the
commercial constructs.
And so many folk will
market and will buy a boat that's just under that so they can
continue to use it without abiding by those additional
rules. But that's quite a large vessel at 82 feet.
Sure. That's fine. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much. Really appreciate that.
We will ask for some advice on this as well.
Thank you. Good submission.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
Right.
We've now got Drowning Prevention Auckland, again, via
video conference.
Right. Welcome.
Good to have you here.
Now, we've got you down for a regular time, but
we'll give you a call with four minutes to go, so if there's anything you want to
highlight from your submission, please feel free.
Otherwise, take anything as read. But in your hands.
Thank you. Tena koutou katoa, and thank you for the opportunity to
speak today. My name is Nicola King-Bigler.
I'm the Chief Executive of Drowning Prevention Auckland.
Firstly, we want to acknowledge the committee for the significant step it has
already made in strengthening this bill.
The proposal to extend mandatory lifejacket wear from children to
all occupants when a vessel is underway reflects the evidence the committee
heard during submissions
that most people who drown in boating incidents are adults and that
lifejackets only save lives when they are being worn.
Drowning Prevention Auckland strongly supports that direction.
However, we believe the remaining issue is the proposed threshold of
vessels six meters or less in waterline length.
Our concern is that vessel length does not reflect how drowning
risk actually occurs. People
unexpectedly enter the water from vessels of all sizes
through falls overboard, capsizing, collisions,
bar crossings, rough conditions, or medical events.
The evidence shows a substantial proportion of recreational boating
activity incidents and fatalities involve vessels
over six meters.
We are also concerned that waterline length introduces
unnecessary complexity into what should be a simple
public safety rule.
Most recreational boaties do not know their vessel's waterline length.
They know the advertised or overall length of their boat.
Introducing a technical measurement that is not currently used within
Maritime Rule Part 91 risks confusion for both
the public and enforcement.
From our perspective, the stronger safety approach is a
clear, nationally consistent, behavior-based rule.
If the vessel is underway, the lifejacket is worn.
I'll now invite Dr. Teresa Stanley to briefly speak to the human
behavior and prevention evidence underpinning our position.
Thanks, Nicola. Tena koutou. I'd just like to
reinforce that human behavior aspect of the issue.
It's a subject dear to my heart, as I recently completed my
PhD
on perceived and actual adult water
competencies in open water.
And the evidence consistently shows that people
tend to underestimate the risk
and overestimate their ability to cope if something
goes wrong.
And this applies to both boating competence and water competence.
People often believe that they can swim,
that the conditions are manageable-
Mm-hmm
... that they are experienced enough,
or that they will have time to put their lifejacket on if
needed.
But many boating incidents involve sudden and
unexpected immersion where there is little or no time to respond.
And that is why the key determinant of survival is whether the lifejacket is
already being worn.
The research shows that it doesn't make sense to leave it up to the skipper
to determine whether the risk is great enough to don a lifejacket in
a boat over six meters.
From a prevention perspective, risk isn't determined by the length of the
vessel.
A person unexpectedly entering the water from a vessel
six meters or more faces the same physiological
challenges as somebody from a five-meter vessel: cold water
shock, disorientation, fatigue, and
difficulty staying afloat. So simple and consistent
rules reduce reliance on judgment and interpretation
in environments where some people are already prone to
underestimating the risk. So that is why we support a clear
behavior-based approach. If the vessel is moving, the
lifejacket is on for all recreational vessels.
Ngā mihi.
Thank you. And we've got just almost five minutes left, so anybody want to ask any
questions? Carlos.
Yeah.
Thank you. When you're talking about human behavior, do you
think that young children are calm enough
to use those called manual inflatable life jacket?
They're not recommend-- Inflatable life jackets aren't recommended for young
people, and
we certainly wouldn't be recommending them.
Yes. So because I think the current legislation being drafted,
those life jacket are being included as
the one people acceptable to use. So do you think that we should be more
specific, say, only certain age of people can
use those manual inflatable life jacket?
Yes. And I think just like there are,
as previous people have mentioned today already,
the PFD terminology,
and there are types of life jackets underneath that.
And I think within that scope,
it can be promoted as to
what is acceptable for various people and
activities.
All right. Thank you. Dan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks for your submission.
I take your point about the waterline length
definition being quite technically complex.
Would another approach be simply just to relax that to a
more simple term, say, overall length of a
vessel rather than,
as you propose in your submission, to get rid of the rule
in general?
I think it just offers complexity that's not required.
Teresa, jump in if you think that my approach is
incorrect, but I just don't think it adds value to be there at all, to be honest.
So you heard the submission
prior, which again said effectively don't put a limit on at all.
And the answer to what's the situation on a commercial vessel
crossing the Cook Strait, for example.
So they basically said that the,
as I took it,
commercial vessels have different sets of rules than
recreational vessels and that covers the issue.
Is that will be your
thinking as well?
Yes. And Maritime Rule Part 91 does already have some
practical exceptions for certain activities such as surfing,
sailboarding, wetsuit based activities.
I think that's, we're not suggesting that those practical exemptions
are necessarily removed. Our primary focus is on a
clear, national, consistent rule that makes it easy for everyone to
understand and for it to be enforced consistently as well.
Yeah. Okay. No, thank you. Any other questions?
No. Okay. That's good. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you. Right. And last but not least.
Good to have you up here, Richie.
So
right. We'll set the
alarm again. If you do the usual, take it as read and-
Yeah
... anything you want to highlight and we'll go to questions. But forward again.
Cool. Thank you, Chair.
Fishing and Game is grateful for the opportunity to appear before the committee
again on the proposed change to extend the scope of this bill to include adults.
My name is Richie Cosgrove. I'm the chief operating officer of Fish and Game New
Zealand. I know many of you will be familiar with Fish and Game, but for others in
the room, we are the statutory organization established under the
Conservation Act, responsible for managing freshwater sports fish, game
bird resources on behalf of the Crown.
We represent about 175,000 license holders, anglers, and game
bird hunters who spend a significant amount of time on or near New
Zealand's lakes and rivers. Many of our license holders use
small recreational vehicles, typically under six meters, while fishing for
trout on inland lakes. Fish and Game supports the Life Jackets for
Children and Young Persons Bill. Improving water safety is a goal we
share. We also support the committee's consideration of extending the
scope to include adults on recreational vessels under six meters,
and we're comfortable with that extension in principle.
What we ask today is that
the committee consider two drafting matters that, if not addressed, would create
practical problems for a significant proportion of our license holders.
These are not objections to the intent of the legislation.
They are refinements to ensure that the law works as
intended.
Points for the committee's consideration is, number one, is the
definition of while underway. A large proportion of our license holders
spend much of their time on the water, fresh water, that is.
We don't have any
statutory obligation over salt water, just fresh water.
They spend a large portion of their time on the water anchored or
drifting slowly or trolling at speeds under two knots.
These are very low risk activities, and treating them the same as active
navigation at speed would be disproportionate and impractical.
We recommend that the definition of while underway explicitly
exclude electronic anchoring, physical anchoring,
drifting, and vessel movement under two knots.
This is a straightforward fix that would protect safety conscious, law
abiding anglers from unintended consequences.
We also note that unpowered vessels under six meters would not benefit from the
same exclusion we recommend for powered vessels.
This is because these are generally smaller than powered vessels.
We support the wearing of life jackets while underway for both adults and children
on unpowered craft, as their smaller size presents a genuine
safety risk with no equivalent low speed mitigation.
We flagged this simply to ensure the distinction is deliberate and
clearly expressed in the drafting.To
summarize, Fish and Game supports this bill and supports extending its
scope to include adults. The two matters I have raised are not objections,
they're practical requirements to ensure the legislation does not inadvertently
capture low-risk fishing activity.
We would welcome the opportunity to work with officials on workable drafting
solutions. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak.
Thanks, Richie.
Is Helen going to add anything?
Cool. No? Cool. Right. Okay, we'll go to questions. We've got a bit of time then.
So I had Celia first.
Thank you. Well, first of all, thank you for all the work you do in the
conservation space as well. But my query is,
this question of underway.
Yes.
Understand the moving a bit faster and
the anchored, it's the bits in between there that I'm not so
certain of. We had a very interesting example from,
I think it's-
Coastguard
... Canterbury Regional.
Canterbury.
Yeah. Where there was an elderly couple fishing,
and there's just a rogue wave came, and if they hadn't been wearing life jackets,
they would've had considerable more difficulty surviving.
So,
and also drifting.
You are moving still, and we just wondered, well, I just wondered,
whether you would accept that those still
pose a bit of risk in some places. And what's the problem with
keeping wearing it, I guess is the other thing.
Yeah.
Because putting things off and on-
Yeah
... seems to add a level of-
Complex-
... risk in itself almost.
Yeah. So for the first part, I don't know about the couple, whether they were
on freshwater or saltwater.
Salt.
Saltwater. Yeah. So in freshwater, the rogue wave is-
Well, okay. That makes sense. So you're only talking about freshwater.
Freshwater. Yeah, inland lakes and rivers.
Okay.
Yeah. And-
So the wind could get up-
Yeah
... but it's not really going to be the same level of surprise.
Yeah.
Thank you very much. I'm not sure where I conclude on it-
Yeah
... but you've clarified it.
And freshwater boats generally don't bear as, are not as big
as the ones that go to sea. They're generally under seven meters,
six meters, those sorts of things.
Simon, then Tangi.
Just wondering, how big do you reckon's the largest wave you get on Lake Taupo?
Not sure. I wouldn't say, but I have been on Lake Coleridge in the South
Island where the weather has turned rough, and we have had to abandon our
work.
Mm.
And every second wave was over the top of the boat.
But
we were also assessed those conditions.
We knew that there was a chance of that suddenly change coming through, and so we
were prepared to leave there. And when we started moving back, we were
underway, so we had our life jackets on.
Okay.
Yeah.
So in terms of distinguish between salt and freshwater-
Freshwater, yeah
... it's really around underway conditions-
Yeah
... risk as opposed to whether the water's salty or fresh.
Yeah. And underway also has an interesting with some of these new
electronic anchoring systems that you-
Mm
... like a Minn Kota,
because you're under motor propulsion.
It's holding you on a GPS position, you see.
So you could argue that that is underway, but you're not actually moving off that
GPS point. You've got a mechanical or electronic power system
that's propelling the vessel to keep it where it is.
Just to supplement.
Yeah.
So in that instance, given that the
vessel's not anchored, but it's held on station-
Mm
... what is the difference in risk between a vessel that's anchored
potentially with a
nylon rope
to the sea floor, head to wind, as it tip is or
into the waves, into the current, versus on station?
Are there any risks that creep in with holding on station versus anchored?
Only if the electronic anchor fails , I would say.
Right.
But it's that definition. A lot of our regional councils consider those
electronic anchoring as they're underway when they're actually just being
stationary.
Okay. So if the electronic anchoring is
positioning the boat head to wind-
Yeah
... into the oncoming waves, then it would have round about the same risk profile
as-
Absolutely
... the vessel that's physically anchored.
Absolutely. Yeah.
Yeah, okay. Good to understand.
Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Richie.
If I may, can I-
This is further to Celia's question.
You've identified the possibility of low-risk activities-
Mm
... alongside the underway definition.
Now, you haven't provided an exhaustive list.
Exactly.
Where would you see the mechanism for that list being defined, or who would define
what is a low-risk activity?
Representing angles, I would say, low speed trolling is
a low-risk activity. You
don't want to be moving too fast that the lure's being too fast for the fish
to catch it, sort of thing, as you troll.
So,
yes, you would have to define it somewhere.
I'm not sure where exactly under which section you would define those
activities, but then you've also got other people that are not fishing that
are wanting just to go along at a slow speed to take in the
environment of our lakes and rivers.
But you think the low-risk activity would be a,
maybe not a catchall, but that would cover and then if the committee does go
down this path to think about the mechanism by which those activities-
Yeah
... could be identified.
Yeah.
Carlos.
So yeah, just follow up that question as well.
When you talk about low-risk activities, you mean lower risk
for them to fall out from, fall from the boat.
Yes. Yeah. No-
But the risk once they're in the water, if they're unfortunately in the water, are
the same, isn't it?
Yeah.
So the risk factor doesn't change.
Yeah. It's how you get in the water and the low risk is if we're
related to speed, if we're under two knots, you're not likely to hit
submerged articles or
tree trunks that are in the lake and those sorts of things, so.
Yeah. Okay. And then Tracey, I've still got a
minute, so.
Yeah.
Still got to go.
Thank you for that. And
two points, I suppose. It's always better to have a system that covers everything-
Mm
... because as you make carve-outs-
Yeah
... you can dilute the impact for the remaining group-
... not just exempt the group. But you said
in your submission that it would,
unintended consequences.
What do you mean by that? What's the
worst thing that can happen? You just have to wear a life jacket?
What's the unintended consequence that you're trying to avoid?
Well, we did a bunch of consultation with our regional Fish and Game
officers around this, and when you're anchored on a
lake,
it's easier if you don't have a life jacket on if you're doing the fishing, and
that if you're stationary and those sorts of things.
So that was more just the encumbrance, I would say.
Ah.
That was the feedback I got from them about that.
Yeah.
Which is a thing.
Trying to contemplate fasting with a life jacket on.
Yes.
Yeah. Richie, I think that's all the questions we've got, but thank you and as
Celia said, thank you very much for all the work you're doing.
Oh, thank you.
It's always a pleasure seeing you.
Thank you.
And Helen, likewise, thank you for the work you're doing.